[docs] Batch19 SQL aggregation functions (#17658)
apache/druid: docs/querying/sql-functions.md

## BLOOM_FILTER

> Computes a [bloom filter](../development/extensions-core/bloom-filter.md) from values provided in an expression.

Reviewer: Looks like Bloom is a name so all instances of this should be capitalized

Author: Fixed

> `numEntries` specifies the maximum number of distinct values before the false positive rate increases.
> 
> * **Syntax:** `BLOOM_FILTER(expr, numEntries)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* **Syntax:** `BLOOM_FILTER(expr, numEntries)`  
  `numEntries` specifies the maximum number of distinct values before the false positive rate increases.
```

* **Function type:** Aggregation

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example returns a base64-encoded bloom filter string for entries in `agent_category`:

Author: Yes I think so. I was following another doc but we've been very inconsistent about it. Updated.

```sql
SELECT
  agent_category,
  BLOOM_FILTER(agent_category, 10) as bloom
FROM "kttm"
  GROUP BY agent_category
```

Returns the following:

| `agent_keys` | `bloom` |
| -- | -- |

> | _`empty`_ | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAABAAQAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAEABAAAAAA"` |

Reviewer: We might want to consider another way of formatting this (remove italics?) or see if it can be added to the spelling file. This line and the other instance of _`empty`_ are raising spelling errors.

Author: Removed the italics.

| `Game console` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAQAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgBAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA"` |
| `Personal computer` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAAEAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAQAAAAAAAAAAAAAA"` |
| `Smart TV` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgAA"` |
| `Smartphone` | `"BAAAAAgAAACAAAAAAAAAAAAAAEAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA"` |
| `Tablet` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAACAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIA"` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-aggregations.md)

## BLOOM_FILTER_TEST

Returns true if an expression is contained in a base64-encoded [bloom filter](../development/extensions-core/bloom-filter.md) string.

* **Syntax:** `BLOOM_FILTER_TEST(expr, <STRING>)`

> * **Function type:** Aggregation

Author: Not intentional - fixed.

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example returns `true` for the bloom filter string associated with `agent_filter` entry `Game console`:

```sql
SELECT
  agent_category,
  BLOOM_FILTER_TEST(agent_category, 'BAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAQAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgBAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA') as bloom
FROM "kttm"
GROUP BY agent_category
```

Returns the following:

| `agent_keys` | `bloom` |
| -- | -- |
| `empty` | `false` |
| `Game console` | `true` |
| `Personal computer` | `false` |
| `Smart TV` | `false` |
| `Smartphone` | `false` |
| `Tablet` | `false` |

</details>

> [Learn more](sql-aggregations.md)

Reviewer: Need to fix this link to scalar as well

Author: fixed

* **Function type:** Aggregation

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example returns a Base64-encoded Bloom filter representing the set of devices ,`agent_category`, used in Albania:

```sql
SELECT "country",
  BLOOM_FILTER(agent_category, 10) as albanian_bloom
FROM "kttm"
WHERE "country" = 'Albania'
GROUP BY "country"
```

Returns the following:

|`country`| `albanian_bloom`|
|---| --- | 
|`Albania`|`BAAAAAgAAACAAEAAAAAAAAAAAEIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAQAAAAAAAAAAAAAA`|

</details>

[Learn more](sql-aggregations.md)

## BLOOM_FILTER_TEST

Returns true if an expression is contained in a Base64-encoded [Bloom filter](../development/extensions-core/bloom-filter.md) string.

* **Syntax:** `BLOOM_FILTER_TEST(expr, <STRING>)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, other

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example returns `true` when a device type, `agent_category`, exists in the Bloom filter representing the set of devices used in Albania:

```sql
SELECT agent_category,
BLOOM_FILTER_TEST("agent_category", 'BAAAAAgAAACAAEAAAAAAAAAAAEIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAQAAAAAAAAAAAAAA') AS bloom_test
FROM "kttm"

> GROUP BY 1```

Reviewer 2: The triple back ticks need to go on the next line. That's what is breaking the link checking

Reviewer: `````suggestion
GROUP BY 1
```
`````

## BLOOM_FILTER

Computes a [Bloom filter](../development/extensions-core/bloom-filter.md) from values provided in an expression.

* **Syntax:** `BLOOM_FILTER(expr, numEntries)`  
  `numEntries` specifies the maximum number of distinct values before the false positive rate increases.
* **Function type:** Aggregation

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example returns a Base64-encoded Bloom filter string for entries in `agent_category`:

Reviewer 3: I don't understand this example. It doesn't make sense to have a bloom filter per agent category. Checking the [doc], it looks like it is more common to check for the entries for a time frame.

The following example returns a Base64-encoded Bloof filter string for entries in `agent_category` for events before 12 pm on a specific date:

```sql
SELECT BLOOM_FILTER(agent_category, 10) as agent_bloom
FROM "kttm"
WHERE __time BETWEEN '2019-08-25T00:00:00.686Z' AND '2019-08-25T12:00:00.686Z'
```
Returns the following :

|`agent_bloom`|
| --- |
|`"BAAAAAgAAACAAFAAQAAAgAIAAkIAAAAAQAgAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAIIAAAAAgAAAAAAAAACAAIAAAgBAQAAAAAEABAAAgIA"`|

```sql
SELECT
  agent_category,
  BLOOM_FILTER(agent_category, 10) as bloom
FROM "kttm"
  GROUP BY agent_category
```

Returns the following:

> | `agent_keys` | `bloom` |

Reviewer 3: Suggest changing the example as suggested in line 1294, but note that the SELECT is on `agent_category` and the results column is `agent_keys`.

| -- | -- |
| `empty` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAABAAQAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAEABAAAAAA"` |
| `Game console` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAQAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgBAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA"` |
| `Personal computer` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAAEAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAQAAAAAAAAAAAAAA"` |
| `Smart TV` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgAA"` |
| `Smartphone` | `"BAAAAAgAAACAAAAAAAAAAAAAAEAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA"` |
| `Tablet` | `"BAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAACAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIA"` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-aggregations.md)

## BLOOM_FILTER_TEST

Returns true if an expression is contained in a Base64-encoded [Bloom filter](../development/extensions-core/bloom-filter.md) string.

* **Syntax:** `BLOOM_FILTER_TEST(expr, <STRING>)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, other

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example returns `true` for the Bloom filter string associated with `agent_filter` entry `Game console`:

Reviewer 3: This description doesn't describe what the example does. I suggest simplyfying as follows:

The following example checks for the existence of the agent category `Rotary phone` in the specified bloom filter.

```sql
SELECT BLOOM_FILTER_TEST('Rotary phone', 'BAAAAAgAAACAAFAAQAAAgAIAAkIAAAAAQAgAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAIIAAAAAgAAAAAAAAACAAIAAAgBAQAAAAAEABAAAgIA'
```

Returns the following:

|`bloom_test`|
| --- |
|`false`|

The following example checks for the existence of the agent category `Personal computer` in the specified bloom filter:

```sql
SELECT BLOOM_FILTER_TEST('Personal computer', 'BAAAAAgAAACAAFAAQAAAgAIAAkIAAAAAQAgAAAAAAAAAAgAAAAIIAAAAAgAAAAAAAAACAAIAAAgBAQAAAAAEABAAAgIA') AS "bloom_test"
```

Returns the following:

|`bloom_test`|
| --- |
|`true`|

## DECODE_BASE64_COMPLEX

Decodes a Base64-encoded expression into a complex data type.

You can use the function to ingest data when a column contains an encoded data sketch such as Theta or HLL.

The function supports `hyperUnique` and `serializablePairLongString` data types by default.

> You can enable support for the following complex data types by [loading their extensions](../configuration/extensions.md):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable support for a complex data type load the [corresponding extension](../configuration/extensions.md):
```

- `druid-bloom-filter`: `bloom`
- `druid-datasketches`: `arrayOfDoublesSketch`, `HLLSketch`, `KllDoublesSketch`, `KllFloatsSketch`, `quantilesDoublesSketch`, `thetaSketch`
- `druid-histogram`: `approximateHistogram`, `fixedBucketsHistogram`
- `druid-stats`: `variance`
- `druid-compressed-bigdecimal`: `compressedBigDecimal`
- `druid-momentsketch`: `momentSketch`
- `druid-tdigestsketch`: `tDigestSketch`

* **Syntax:** `DECODE_BASE64_COMPLEX(dataType, expr)`

> * **Function type:** Scalar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Function type:** Scalar, other
```

> <details><summary>Example</summary>

Reviewer 3: These examples are a little different than the rest of the reference because they refer to an imaginary value `theta_input`. My suggestion is to remove the second example and add the following results for the first:

```sql
DECODE_BASE64_COMPLEX('thetaSketch', "theta_input") AS "theta_decoded"
```

Returns the following:

|`theta_decoded`|
|---|
|`AgMDAAAazJNBAAAAAACAP...`|

> The following example decodes a Theta sketch from a Base64-encoded sketch contained in `theta_input`:
> 
> ```sql
> DECODE_BASE64_COMPLEX('thetaSketch', "theta_input")
> ```
> The following example counts the distinct values in an encoded Theta sketch column using [`APPROX_COUNT_DISTINCT_DS_THETA`](#approx_count_distinct_ds_theta):
> 
> ```sql
> APPROX_COUNT_DISTINCT_DS_THETA(DECODE_BASE64_COMPLEX('thetaSketch', "theta_input"))
> ```
> 

Reviewer 3: `````suggestion
The following example returns a Theta sketch complex type from a Base64-encoded string representation of the sketch:

```sql
SELECT DECODE_BASE64_COMPLEX('thetaSketch','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') AS "theta_sketch"
```

You can perform Theta sketch operations on the resulting `COMPLEX<thetaSketch>` value which resembles the input string. 

`````

</details>

[Learn more](./sql-scalar.md#other-scalar-functions)

## DECODE_BASE64_UTF8

Decodes a base64-encoded expression into a UTF-8 encoded string.

* **Syntax:** `DECODE_BASE64_UTF8(expr)`

> * **Function type:** Scalar

Author: Fixed.

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example decodes the Base64-encoded representation of "Hello, World!":

```sql
SELECT
  DECODE_BASE64_UTF8('SGVsbG8sIFdvcmxkIQ==') as decoded
```

Returns the following:

> | `agent_keys` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `decoded` |
```
